.. bpo: 42278
.. date: 2021-08-29-12-39-44
.. nonce: jvmQz_
.. release date: 2023-02-04
.. section: Security

Replaced usage of :func:`tempfile.mktemp` with :func:`tempfile.mkdtemp` to
avoid a potential race condition.

..

.. bpo: 43124
.. date: 2021-05-08-11-50-46
.. nonce: 2CTM6M
.. section: Security

Made the internal ``putcmd`` function in :mod:`smtplib` sanitize input for
presence of ``\r`` and ``\n`` characters to avoid (unlikely) command
injection.

..

.. bpo: 43882
.. date: 2021-04-25-07-46-37
.. nonce: Jpwx85
.. section: Security

The presence of newline or tab characters in parts of a URL could allow some
forms of attacks.

Following the controlling specification for URLs defined by WHATWG
:func:`urllib.parse` now removes ASCII newlines and tabs from URLs,
preventing such attacks.

..

.. bpo: 42967
.. date: 2021-02-14-15-59-16
.. nonce: YApqDS
.. section: Security

Fix web cache poisoning vulnerability by defaulting the query args separator
to ``&``, and allowing the user to choose a custom separator.

..

.. date: 2023-02-03-23-44-21
.. gh-issue: 1
.. nonce: DxfKUA
.. section: Build

LTO: add optimisation flags to LDFLAGS.

..

.. date: 2023-02-01-23-20-11
.. gh-issue: 1
.. nonce: jcYm0U
.. section: Build

New "configure" option: "--enable-loadable-sqlite-extensions".

..

.. date: 2023-02-01-22-57-48
.. gh-issue: 1
.. nonce: q_Fh4L
.. section: Build

No longer building the "_Qt" extension on macOS, because the Quicktime
Framework has been removed from Xcode 10.12.

..

.. date: 2023-02-01-18-22-47
.. gh-issue: 1
.. nonce: 0GYif8
.. section: Build

Do not build anything if "make install" is called on an empty tree, because
LTO and PGO settings are ignored in that scenario. Error out instead.

..

.. date: 2023-02-01-14-46-34
.. gh-issue: 1
.. nonce: xjOQ2L
.. section: Build

PGO: use "-fprofile-partial-training" with GCC, in order to optimise for
speed those functions not executed during the training phase. Without it,
they're optimised for size.

This option was introduced in GCC-10.1.

..

.. date: 2023-02-01-14-18-36
.. gh-issue: 1
.. nonce: iH6cxV
.. section: Build

LTO now runs in parallel. The use of "-flto=auto" requires GCC-10 or newer.
