.. bpo: 43223
.. date: 2021-03-29-17-58-06
.. nonce: fVl6Kg
.. release date: 2021-06-02
.. section: Security

In classes deriving from :class:`BaseHTTPServer`, including
:class:`SimpleHTTPServer` and :class:`CGIHttpServer`, make sure that the
requested URL's path doesn't start with a double slash which, if copied in
the Location header on redirection, would be interpreted as redirection to
another host ("//host/path" URL).

..

.. bpo: 37820
.. date: 2021-03-29-16-24-17
.. nonce: z1LXfg
.. section: Security

Disallow URLs starting with URL:, and those wrapped between a pair of
('<','>') characters, so that local files cannot be accessed by passing in
something like 'URL:/etc/passwd' or '</etc/passwd>'.

There is really no justification to keep these old quirks from the very root
of Python, they are not documented and pose a security risk for those
wanting to selectively rule out schemes allowing to access local files.

..

.. bpo: 43075
.. date: 2021-03-29-14-35-27
.. nonce: MV-_SC
.. section: Security

Fix some RE DoS possibility in HTTP basic auth handler. See the bug for full
details.

..

.. bpo: 35278
.. date: 2021-03-29-13-11-48
.. nonce: xjEYGs
.. section: Security

The functions creating temporary files in :mod:`tempfile` now longer accept
path separators in the prefix and suffix arguments, avoiding unintended or
malicious escapes of the temporary directory.

..

.. bpo: 29125
.. date: 2021-03-26-15-57-05
.. nonce: 7qqQ0Z
.. section: Security

Fixed arbitrary shell code injection through TIX_LIBRARY variable.

..

.. bpo: 43285
.. date: 2021-03-13-03-48-14
.. nonce: g-Hah3
.. section: Security

:mod:`ftplib` no longer trusts the IP address value returned from the server
in response to the PASV command by default.  This prevents a malicious FTP
server from using the response to probe IPv4 address and port combinations
on the client network.

Code that requires the former vulnerable behavior may set a
``trust_server_pasv_ipv4_address`` attribute on their :class:`ftplib.FTP`
instances to ``True`` to re-enable it.

..

.. bpo: 42938
.. date: 2021-01-18-09-27-31
.. nonce: 4Zn4Mp
.. section: Security

Avoid static buffers when computing the repr of :class:`ctypes.c_double` and
:class:`ctypes.c_longdouble` values.

..

.. bpo: 42051
.. date: 2020-10-19-10-56-27
.. nonce: EU_B7u
.. section: Security

The :mod:`plistlib` module no longer accepts entity declarations in XML
plist files to avoid XML vulnerabilities. This should not affect users as
entity declarations are not used in regular plist files.

..

.. bpo: 40791
.. date: 2020-05-28-06-06-47
.. nonce: QGZClX
.. section: Security

Add ``volatile`` to the accumulator variable in ``hmac.compare_digest``,
making constant-time-defeating optimizations less likely.

..

.. bpo: 39603
.. date: 2020-02-12-14-17-39
.. nonce: Gt3RSg
.. section: Security

Prevent http header injection by rejecting control characters in
http.client.putrequest(...).

..

.. bpo: 39503
.. date: 2020-01-30-16-15-29
.. nonce: B299Yq
.. section: Security

CVE-2020-8492: The :class:`~urllib.request.AbstractBasicAuthHandler` class
of the :mod:`urllib.request` module uses an inefficient regular expression
which can be exploited by an attacker to cause a denial of service. Fix the
regex to prevent the catastrophic backtracking. Vulnerability reported by
Ben Caller and Matt Schwager.

..

.. bpo: 17239
.. date: 2018-09-11-18-30-55
.. nonce: kOpwK2
.. section: Security

The xml.sax and xml.dom.minidom parsers no longer processes external
entities by default. External DTD and ENTITY declarations no longer load
files or create network connections.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2021-04-01-11-07-53
.. nonce: OZQVXU
.. section: Library

For interactive sessions, fix several :file:`site.py` Readline-related
initialization problems, and have warnings printed when appropriate. Don't
fail if there is no global Readline init file. Don't fail with ad-hoc
Readline libraries. The history file is set up even if reading the default
init files failed.

..

.. bpo: 39017
.. date: 2020-07-12-22-16-58
.. nonce: x3Cg-9
.. section: Library

Avoid infinite loop when reading specially crafted TAR files using the
tarfile module (CVE-2019-20907).

..

.. bpo: 39503
.. date: 2020-03-25-16-02-16
.. nonce: YmMbYn
.. section: Library

:class:`~urllib.request.AbstractBasicAuthHandler` of :mod:`urllib.request`
now parses all WWW-Authenticate HTTP headers and accepts multiple challenges
per header: use the realm of the first Basic challenge.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2021-03-30-20-38-11
.. nonce: JiQVbe
.. section: Build

Install 'collections', 'http' and 'urllib' modules.
