.. bpo: 34113
.. date: 2018-07-28-10-34-00
.. nonce: eZ5FWV
.. release date: 2019-03-17
.. section: Core and Builtins

Fixed crash on debug builds when opcode stack was adjusted with negative
numbers. Patch by Constantin Petrisor.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2017-01-03-13-24-46
.. nonce: Gdnd-g
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3104 -- Access to Names in Outer Scopes

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-12-02-20-53-56
.. nonce: HC618m
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3135 -- New Super

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-11-28-23-42-52
.. nonce: ZLArge
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3115 -- Metaclasses in Python 3000

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-11-16-11-00-32
.. nonce: bEdggj
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 484 -- Type Hints

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-11-11-10-41-10
.. nonce: H2jjYt
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3107 -- Function Annotations

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-11-09-11-35-09
.. nonce: oIoVRB
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3151 -- Reworking the OS and IO exception hierarchy

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-11-03-20-20-21
.. nonce: bN59jm
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3148 -- futures - execute computations asynchronously

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-11-01-09-52-48
.. nonce: k9VEcg
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 362 -- Function Signature Object

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-10-31-10-43-54
.. nonce: Uo9siT
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 492 -- Coroutines with async and await syntax

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-10-07-16-02-17
.. nonce: O4KLMK
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 3102 -- Keyword-Only Arguments

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2016-10-05-14-41-06
.. nonce: AWvde6
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 515 -- Underscores in Numeric Literals

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2015-11-07-17-12-10
.. nonce: kiUkdD
.. section: Core and Builtins

PEP 465: Add the '@' operator for matrix multiplication.  (Also, glorious
revolution.)

..

.. bpo: 4761
.. date: 2018-09-19-08-51-14
.. nonce: AqNuDX
.. section: Library

Add the \*at() family of functions (openat(), etc.) to the posix module.
Patch by Ross Lagerwall.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2017-02-02-15-53-23
.. nonce: lj1zDD
.. section: Library

PEP 628 -- Add math.tau

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2019-01-22-00-12-44
.. nonce: aoXxkR
.. section: Tests

Fix SSL regression test failure on non-UTF8 filesystems

Use logic found elsewhere in tests to detect and skip tests which require
(in this case) UTF8 filenames in the filesystem, when the filesystem does
not support them.

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2018-05-30-13-38-36
.. nonce: VJ1FyR
.. section: Build

Extensions where not properly compiled with PGO because the CFLAGS were not
read from the environment in "setup.py". Once that was fixed, gcc failed
with an internal compiler error (ICE) because the same source file was used
in 3 different extensions so it was compiled 3 different times in the
profile generation stage: https://gcc.gnu.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=85759

After introducing the concept of mtime-conditional recompilation to
distutils, the ICE was avoided.

While building the software in a sandbox, on Gentoo, it became obvious that
the profiling task was accessing system-wide paths it had no business
accessing. This was also fixed.

A couple of regression tests fail randomly when the suite is run in
parallel, so we work around that by excluding them from the profiling task.

EXTRATESTOPTS is now used inside PROFILE_TASK, to allow for custom arguments
(like "-jN" to run N jobs in parallel).

..

.. bpo: 0
.. date: 2018-05-11-18-18-22
.. nonce: xO_Rw_
.. section: Build

document that LTO is no longer enabled by --enable-optimizations

..

.. bpo: 5915
.. date: 2018-09-19-15-52-01
.. nonce: cMNcgK
.. section: C API

Bring in a small subset of PEP 383 -- just the PyUnicode_FSConverter
routine.
